Okay, hello everyone and welcome
to Enterprise IT State of
the Union at WWDC for 2004.
I'm Bud Tribble.
I'm Vice President of
Software Technology for Apple.
And about one year ago,
I stood up here and I talked
about Apple's approach
to the enterprise market.
And we've had a very exciting year.
Lots of products introduced,
lots of new partners, lots of solutions.
And I'd like to start out by
sharing that with some of you.
Now, Apple's approach to the enterprise
is actually very simple.
We start with an open standards approach.
We leverage open source software.
But Apple integrates it
to make it easy to use.
The result is the power of Unix,
but the simplicity of a Mac.
Now, a perfect example of
that is Mac OS X Server.
This is the Panther server
I'm talking about right now.
It's open source made easy.
It epitomizes our approach.
Again,
industry standards like BSD and open
source implementation like Darwin,
which is an open source
implementation of BSD plus Mach,
additional open source
integrated in by Apple.
What that does is it lets
Apple focus all of our efforts and
our innovation on integration to
make Mac OS X server easy to use,
easy to deploy, easy to manage,
and easy to develop for.
Now, we don't just integrate a
few open source projects.
We integrate in Panther over
80 open source projects,
things like Apache, Tomcat, MySQL, JBoss,
et cetera, et cetera.
Now, these are things that on other
systems you would spend a lot
of time downloading packages,
getting the packages installed.
We integrate it together to the point
where to get a mail service running,
it's a single click of a checkbox.
That's Apple's added value.
So, ease of use, ease of deployment,
ease of management.
Now, just simple example of this,
let's take a look at our mail server.
On the server side, we integrate PostVix,
which is an open source SMTP server,
Cyrus, which is an IMAP server,
and a Berkeley DB backend
for the mail indexes.
We don't stop there.
We also integrate ScrollMail,
which is a web mail interface
that's based on PHP,
so we integrate PHP as well.
We integrate Mailman for a list server,
which is built on Python,
so we integrate Python as well.
And we don't stop there.
For security,
we provide OpenSSL so that you can
have SSL authentication for IMAP.
We integrate OpenLDAP so you can have
LDAP authorization for your mail.
All of this is packaged in such
a way that for the sysadmin,
again,
a single check of a checkbox turns all
this on and it runs right out of the box.
Now, I want to take a moment to
just focus on that last issue,
security,
because in our role as integrating
all of this open source functionality,
we pay a lot of attention to security.
At the Core OS level,
we're doing a lot of things.
We're taking our complete package and
we're doing what's called Common Criteria
Certification at EAL Level 3.
This is a government program sponsored
by NIST to make sure that kind of
all your T's are crossed and your
I's are dotted in terms of security,
and is actually a requirement for selling
into many government accounts these days.
For data security,
we provide full 128-bit AES encryption.
We also implement secure delete,
including the secure delete
that supposedly the NSA can't
recover your bits off the disk.
I think we write it 21 times
or something like that.
Network transport security layer,
mail services available
through SSL version 3,
single sign-on with Kerberos,
a whole variety of security features.
But equally important,
what we do over time is,
as the open source
community uncovers issues,
their security issues,
we put those patches together,
package them up as updates,
and get them out to you.
And we hope a timely manner.
We think we're actually getting
reasonably good at this.
And one of the beauties of
open source is that the moment
someone reports a security issue,
they also tend to show up with the patch.
So there's not a huge lag there
for us to get those out to people.
And of course,
we have client security as well
that plugs right into the services
that are provided by the servers.
So virtual private networks, VPNs,
FileVault, which I like,
you can actually encrypt
your home directory,
provide physical security in
case you lose your laptop,
authentication with Kerberos again,
and secure remote administration via SSL.
Now,
I'd like to just take a few minutes and
go over the last year or so in review.
Take a look at what's been
happening in the enterprise space,
and a lot's been happening.
We've really had a blazing pace of
innovation with enterprise products.
And start out with, in February of 2003,
a little over a year ago,
we introduced XServeRay.
Now, as you may have heard about,
this was a breakthrough product
in terms of price per gigabyte,
about $3 a gigabyte.
Which, compared to other storage
solutions out there,
pretty much blows them away.
Greatly appreciated by our
multimedia customers who are
generating huge amounts of data.
But IT in general,
as I'll get into further on in the talk,
storage is a very important
part of any solution.
XServeRay is an excellent part of that.
October, we introduced Panther Server,
Mac OS X Panther Server, automatic setup,
server admin, open directory 2.
Mac OS X Server 2 was introduced,
Samba 3.
We included Postfix
Mail with that release,
as well as JBoss.
A lot of features,
a lot of open source integration.
January 2005, XSERV G5,
so dual gigabit G5s,
or two gigahertz G5s,
dual gigabit Ethernet,
three serial ATA hot plug drives,
really a dynamite one-use server,
which has been really snapped up by
many of our customers in the IT space,
as well as I'll talk about a
little bit in the scientific
computing and cluster space.
space.
Now, April 2004, we introduced XSAN.
And it's our storage area
network solution for Mac OS X.
Very important to us.
It's a full 64-bit storage area solution.
You can store terabytes of data online.
Hooks right into XSERV,
so you get good cost per gigabyte.
Very high performance.
Multiple clients sharing a single volume.
Gives you shared fiber channel
storage to the clients.
Failover, multi-pathing, automatic.
Volume management built in,
so that you don't have to, you know,
move lots of data around
to manage your volumes.
And interoperability with ADEX products,
so that you can interoperate
with storage on Mac,
Windows, Linux, and Unix.
A great product.
Excellent for anybody who has to
move around large amounts of data.
That includes multimedia
and multimedia pros,
but also IT in general.
Then finally, June, just recently,
introducing Apple Remote Desktop 2.
And that's desktop management made easy.
Anybody who has a lot of clients
or even a few clients to manage
needs Apple Remote Desktop.
Apple Remote Desktop gives you
remote software distribution,
so remotely installed packages,
the ability to do
remote asset management.
So there's seven predefined
reports that will give you reports
with over 200 attributes of
what is configured in each client.
Remote administration with the ability
to run remote Unix scripts on the client.
And finally,
remote assistance based on VNC so
that you can actually give remote
assistance to someone running by
moving the mouse and essentially
taking over control of their system.
A great help desk application.
So again, anybody managing any
number of Mac clients.
It all really needs remote desktop.
Best of all, these last two products,
which have been announced
but aren't shipping yet,
Apple Remote Desktop 2 and XSAN are
included in your developer pack.
So you get preview releases of this.
And I encourage you to
play around with them,
take a look at their features,
see how they might interact
with your own products.
So past year or so,
blazing pace of innovation
in the enterprise space.
I think that's reflected in the
interest we're seeing in this room.
I see we have an overflow crowd here,
lots of people standing in the back.
I sort of apologize,
but hopefully we'll make
it worth your while.
Just a moment I'd like to take
to talk about one thing that
we don't often talk about.
And that is,
when you go to actually price
our products and look at the
performance and the features,
you find out that we're a lot
more price competitive and
often beat out the competitors.
That's not something people
normally associate with Apple,
but in the enterprise space, believe me,
it's true.
So for example, Mac OS X Server, $999.
And that's an unlimited client license,
so there's no per client tax.
That's a big deal.
XServe G5, $2999.
That's a breakthrough price for a one-use
server with that kind of performance.
Fibre Channel PCI, $499.
Remember when just the cables were $499?
This is a great product at a great price.
XServe RAID, $10,999.
That works out to about $3 per gigabyte,
as I mentioned.
Great price.
And then finally, XSAN,
and you're not going
to beat this anywhere,
has full storage area network for $999
per node with no cap on storage size.
So go price that out with other vendors.
You're going to be very
surprised about that.
So not something we talk about a lot,
but in the enterprise space,
we're often the price leader.
And that's really worth thinking about.
Now I'd like to just take a
few minutes to talk about,
in addition to our products,
a couple of emerging trends that
we're seeing in the enterprise space
and in the industry in general.
The first one will be no surprise,
and that's enterprise storage.
So the needs for enterprise storage
are literally going through the roof.
Here's a graph just looking at
the needs in kind of thousands
of petabytes or petabytes,
the needs for storage based
on regulatory compliance.
And I don't know if you think
regulatory compliance is good or bad,
but it's here to stay,
and it's driving storage needs.
Whether you're an enterprise, a school,
a hospital, a medical establishment,
your needs are going through the roof.
64% compound annual growth.
Another aspect of the storage
needs is the need for storage.
And one of the reasons for
the storage explosion is,
of course, digital content, multimedia.
And here's an example of some of the
data rates that need to be supported,
and that leads directly to data size for
things like 1080i interlaced full HD,
165 megabytes per second.
And for those of you
who are doing the math,
that's about -- so you're using -- if
you're storing that to an XServe rate,
you're using about five cents of storage.
And you're using about five
cents of storage per second,
or about $180 per hour.
So you'll fill up your
XSERV rate pretty quickly,
and it means that enterprises are
buying storage by the boatload.
And we don't see this
trend slowing down at all.
Once you get to or below $3 per gigabyte,
it sort of changes the equation
in terms of backup strategies.
And the trend we're seeing emerge is
disk-to-disk-to-tape backup strategy.
In other words, live storage on disk,
you take an online backup to
a second set of disk drives,
and then for archival storage,
you finally start a tape at some rate.
And that leads to a strategy like this.
Again, backup clients on the network,
the systems that are being backed up,
backup server managing the whole process,
backing up to an XServe RAID,
which is online storage backup,
and then finally over fiber
channel to a tape library where you
finally do your archival storage.
And Apple solutions in this space
work very well and work very well
with existing industry solutions
out there like Legato or Veritas.
And just an example of this, Citel.
Citel is a leading provider of seismic
data to the petroleum industry.
They have over one petabyte of data.
It's one of the largest databases
of this type in North America.
And what they've done is they've
converted from tape storage for
their backup to XServe RAID for
their backup so they can have
all of their backup data online.
So far, they've installed 10
XServe RAIDs in 2003.
They're adding another 60
terabytes of storage this year.
And Chris Hansen from Citel says this.
"Compared to the storage
systems we used before,
XServe RAID costs about 10
times less per terabyte.
XServe RAID makes having seismic
data online and ready to copy
substantially more cost effective."
Another thing he says is that,
hey, a lot of people don't consider
Apple for their storage needs.
He says, absolutely,
no matter what systems
you're running as servers,
you need to have a backup.
XServe RAID is a breakthrough product.
Second trend we're seeing out there,
other than storage explosion,
is cluster computing.
And I'm going to take a few
moments to talk about this.
Now, this is an emerging trend,
but here's what I think is going on.
Starting in the '60s,
we had the mainframe takeoff
through the '60s and '70s.
Client server computing came
in in the '80s and '90s.
And sort of, you know,
mainframes haven't gone away completely,
but a lot of the computing that was
done by mainframes is now done by
SMP systems with client server computing.
The trend we think is emerging is the
move to cluster computing in IT shops.
And you're not going to
see it everywhere at once,
and in fact the very first place
you're seeing it is actually the
first place you saw client-server
computing which is that academic
computing at MIT or at CMU and then it
gradually moved into the enterprise.
We're now seeing very large
clusters being deployed.
A case study, Virginia Tech,
I'm sure if you're alive
you've probably heard of it,
1100 G5 systems,
dual G5 systems deployed,
teraflops of computing.
They came out when they introduced
as number three supercomputer in
the world on the top 500.org list.
The total time it took them to
deploy this was four months,
about 5.2 million to deploy which
is a fraction of what number one
and number two supercomputer took.
Fraction meaning, you know,
1/20th or 1/50th the cost.
So this is a breakthrough technology.
We're seeing it first
in scientific computing,
but we expect and we're actually
seeing clusters making inroads into IT.
And the enterprise market is driven
by the very same reasons that
scientific computing is adopting it.
It's a better price performance solution.
You have lots of interchangeable
one-use systems racked together,
very easy to manage.
If one of them goes bad,
you just yank it out and put in
a new one from a set of spares
versus a large expensive support
agreement for an SMP system.
And we have applications showing
up like Oracle 10G for clustered
computing or grid computing.
So the pieces are coming
together and we expect to see
a trend here in the industry.
Apple has great solutions in this space.
We sell these things all the time to the
scientific and academic computer market.
We have great partners like Miracom,
Mathematica, Lustra.
BioTeam and Gridiron.
Case study, Colsa just announced that
they're going to deploy,
they're in the process of deploying
1,566 dual processor XR of G5s.
Their target performance is 25 teraflops.
They ran their own custom
benchmark to do this.
They're going to do this
at a cost of 5.8 million.
Incredibly cost effective
for large performance needs.
A quote from Dr.
Anthony.
D'Arienzo at Colsa.
We did a best value competition
and Apple won that competition.
It was based on performance,
the power requirements, floor space,
et cetera, and cost.
And an assessment of vendor stability.
We solicited it to six
companies and Apple won.
It's a big deal.
It's a trend.
It's going to show up in IT.
Again, here are just a few of the
places currently in government,
nonprofit,
academic that are deploying Mac clusters.
in the process of deploying
Mac clusters today.
Okay, let's switch gears a bit
here to enterprise solutions.
And over the past year,
we've had a number of partners announce
great solutions in the enterprise space,
IBM, Sun, PeopleSoft, Novell, Borland,
Sybase, Oracle.
I want to focus in on a few things
that we're announcing new this week,
or that our partners are
announcing this week.
IBM Lotus software,
so expanded support for Mac OS X clients.
And the big deal here is
that they're supporting the
IBM Lotus workspace architecture
or framework on the Mac client.
So this lets them start to move their
brands over based on that strategy,
starting with Lotus.
But I expect we'll see other
things following as well.
This is a big deal for us and
for IBM and for our customers.
PeopleSoft,
announcing Safari certification.
This is also a big deal.
What it represents is that Safari,
the browser we all know and love,
has matured to the point
where it has really become,
based on certification by PeopleSoft
and similar efforts in the case
of Oracle and SAP and others,
has become the browser of choice
for the Mac and the enterprise.
So we've done this by
concentrating on the web,
and it's going to have RSS and all
sorts of new things in the future.
But we've done this by
concentrating on building
Safari to implement web standards,
number one, and number two,
working with our partners
like PeopleSoft to get actual
certification for the product.
Novell Group-Wise,
full support for Mac OS clients.
Another great partner for us.
And now it's my pleasure
to introduce Tim Hoechs,
who's Senior Vice President of
Technology for Oracle Corporation,
and he's going to tell us about some
great things that Oracle is doing
with respect to the Mac OS platform.
So, Tim, come on up.
Thanks.
Thanks, Bud.
So first, nobody panic.
Despite the fact that I'm sure I am
wearing the only tie in this building,
I am a Macintosh user.
Since my first 128K
Mac freshman year in college,
I have used nothing but,
including 16 years at Oracle.
Although then I think it was
used mostly for Lode Runner,
now it is more productively put to use,
I hope.
I'm going to spend a few minutes
talking about Oracle strategy,
just to familiarize everyone with
who we are and what we're focused on,
and then put that into the OS X context.
And so with that, I'm going to start with
a few minutes of Q&A.
First, I've had a lot of folks ask me,
so Apple and Oracle,
I don't picture y'all on
the same slide together.
And historically, that's been true.
But
We've always been very
friendly companies.
And we've always been focused very
much in being innovative siblings,
really, in new technology.
And Apple, we all are well aware
of their innovations.
And on the server side,
on the enterprise information side,
we've been very proud at
Oracle of pioneering and
innovating new technology as well.
And so because of the relationship
we've had as friendly companies,
we have over the years tried
many times to work together.
As a matter of fact,
one of my first speaking
opportunities was just down the
hall here at the Macworld Expo
probably about 12 years ago,
12, 14 years ago,
when we first introduced
Oracle for Macintosh.
And it was a version 5 database
with a cool hypercard interface.
And ever since then,
we've been looking for
opportunities to work together.
But once Oracle decided not
to release its database,
we've been looking for
opportunities to work together.
for desktop platforms with version 7.
It just became too big to do that.
Then we didn't have a
release for the Mac anymore.
We focused on it as a client.
So we have many customers,
particularly in our education customers,
in our government customers,
that's embraced the Mac as
an enterprise client.
And so we focused on
making sure that our tools,
and probably as importantly,
our enterprise applications,
our e-business suite
for doing ERP and so on,
support the Mac as a client.
And so we've spent some time there.
But not until now have we
started readdressing the server
operating system as a platform
for our database technology.
And the reason was simply that the
database technology had become so
large that it needed to be re-adjusted.
It needed a Unix-based server
operating system to exploit.
And with OS X, that's what we have.
And so what we're talking about
this week is the release of
our premier database product.
We call it Oracle 10G.
I'll tell you what the
G stands for in just a second.
And on Mac OS X.
Let me take a quick step back and then
I'll tell you a little bit more about
what I mean by Oracle 10G for OS X.
So first,
Bud mentioned a little bit about this
evolution from server-centric computing
through desktop-centric computing
into network-centric computing.
It was on this left side
that Oracle was first born,
and we focused on providing
database management technology
for large organizations and
pioneering the relational database
management as a platform for that.
And then, as client-server grew,
this is really where we grew up,
and we focused on not only
broadening our database technology,
but building tools for building
applications that ran on clients,
and these two would
communicate over the network.
What was important about this model,
though, is that the sophistication
of the information system,
which was really locked
inside the application,
was on the desktop.
It was a desktop-centric view.
And as much as we like our desktops,
that's great, but it's not a cost.
It's a cost-effective way to build and
deploy enterprise information systems,
and we've been learning that over the
last several years about client-server.
What we needed, really,
was a network-centric model,
where we took the complexity of our
information system off of the desktop,
where it's really impossible to manage,
and put it in the network,
where it can be managed centrally,
and where it can be secured centrally,
and where it can be scaled centrally,
and so on.
And this model is one we
entered into in the late 90s,
in the 1996-97 timeframe,
with a release of our product.
That was the first time we had
a product that we had a system
that could be managed centrally,
and we had a system that
could be secured centrally,
could be scaled centrally,
and so on.
And this was a model
that we called Oracle 8i.
And it was focused on making sure that
the database could do all the work
required to serve up not just data,
but all the application functionality
required to really exploit
this network-centric model,
which costs less,
and is easier to secure,
and easier to scale, and so on.
And so as this evolution occurred,
we also saw a change in the hardware
architectures to support it.
In the server-centric approach,
the way I solved the problem was
by making the computer bigger.
In the desktop-centric approach,
the way I solved it was
making our desktops bigger,
which is really where
the complexity resided.
But in the network-centric approach,
we've seen a whole new
opportunity for new architectures,
the most significant of which
is this scalability problem.
We need to often make our systems bigger.
Well, how are we going to do that?
Well, like I said,
we could build a bigger piece of iron,
and this is really what
went on with a couple paths,
one on mainframes,
but also in the SMP world,
making bigger and bigger boxes.
This is very expensive,
and it does let us scale up,
but only to a point.
And the problem is,
it doesn't really effectively
let us scale down,
because sometimes we want to
make our systems smaller as well,
based on different loads
at different seasons,
all sorts of reasons.
And so what we started to investigate
was grid computing as a paradigm that
not only lets us scale up and scale down,
but more importantly, lets us scale out.
Instead of getting bigger equipment,
we're adding equipment to a system
to allow it to get bigger gradually.
What's important about this is we
can start small and add capability
as we go to grow to any size we want.
And we aren't constrained by the
physical proportions of the box,
really.
And so we love large hardware,
but more importantly now,
we're focused on this low-cost
way of scaling out information.
So that we can have lots of
inexpensive servers cooperating
to perform a single task.
Now,
Bud started to reference grid computing
mostly in the scientific world.
And the idea here is, actually,
I have a quick college story.
I had a classmate in
college named Robert Morris.
Maybe some of you have heard of him.
He was the one that wrote The Worm
that got loose from Cornell when
he was a graduate student.
And we were taking a computer
graphics class together,
and we were writing a ray-transferred
computer graphics class.
And we were writing a ray-transferred
I actually, to my Mac credits,
I think wrote the first
ray-tracer for the Mac.
It was on a Mac 2,
which was not up to the job.
At least,
that's what I told my professor.
But he had this ray-tracer,
and I was amazed at how rapidly he was
able to get these sophisticated images.
Mine would chug all night,
and they'd be the size
of a postage stamp.
His would go all night,
and they'd be beautiful.
And I asked him how he did it,
and he said, well,
I'm chunking up the problem.
And I'm taking this part of the screen.
And I have accounts on computers
all over the university.
I'm taking this part,
and I'm sending it off to
that computer to compute.
And I'm taking this part,
and I'm sending it off to that computer.
You see where he got the
idea for his errant worm.
And he was spreading the work
of his job across machines.
But those machines are separate.
They're not cooperating.
We chunked up the problem and
distributed it to lots of machines.
And many of the scientific grid
computing problems are this way.
That's not the kind of grid computing.
We're talking about.
What we're talking about is
really using multiple computers
to attack a single problem.
And for us, the data management
problem is not chunkable.
We can't let all of us have
little separate databases.
We're talking about all of us cooperating
to manipulate the exact same data.
And how do we make sure we don't
step on each other when we do it?
How do I make sure your change is
reflected in your report and so on?
And so for Oracle,
when we mean grid computing,
we mean these different layers.
First, storage grids.
And Bud already talked a lot about how
technology is advancing in this way.
To make sure that we can add
storage without scaling up,
but scaling out.
As we need storage,
we feed it more disks.
And it can make the collective
storage subsystem larger.
More importantly for us
is in this database world.
And for us,
that means clusters of computers
cooperating to be a single database.
Also true in the
application server world,
where we have now multiple servers.
multiple nodes in a cluster
running an application server task.
So let me tell you a little bit about
10G and how it does this grid computing.
When we talk about 10G,
we like to refer to the ilities.
The first ility is availability.
This is the idea that in this grid model,
if any of these
inexpensive machines fails,
big deal.
The collective system is still running.
And in our case,
the database can run even when
the computer or one or some number
of the computers running it fail.
The things that are in 10G that are
particularly cool for this is something
we call real application clusters.
This is our technology that allow
these nodes in a cluster to cooperate.
And DataGuard,
which gives us a higher level of
availability by going to another site.
The secondality is scalability.
I talked about this a little bit already.
My problems start small.
I need to make it bigger.
Rather than doing a forklift
upgrade by moving this computer
out and putting a bigger one in,
we just add nodes to our
cluster and it grows.
This is great for developers
because you can start with a
small one computer system and
then grow it as the need requires.
Our next ability is secureability.
It's important that we can,
at the server,
manage the security of information.
Bud talked about the all-important common
criteria and other certifications that
enforce not just how software works,
but the whole development
process used to build it.
And ensuring that that is used
consistently across the applications you
build in a database means that we have
to secure the information at the source.
And so for us,
that means inside the server.
We secure the data with the data.
Usability is important, of course.
And for those of you who
have used Oracle in the past,
you know it is a sophisticated
piece of software.
It is.
And as a result, we tend often to focus
on those prior ilities.
It's going to be secure.
It's going to be high performance.
It's going to be scalable.
And this one we've often left for last.
Okay?
And so you needed to be a highly
qualified professional to maximize the
capability of the Oracle environment.
Well, in 10G,
we're focused a lot on accessing the
power of the 10G database to everybody.
And so one of the things we've
added is a development environment
built right into the database.
We call it HTMLDB.
Sorry for the name.
I'm not the proudest of the name.
But the technology is extraordinary.
It's a web-based development environment
where all development happens through
the web as well as deployment.
Okay?
So the actual definition of
the application is that it's
a web-based environment.
It's just data inside an
Oracle database that's rendered on the
fly inside an HTML-based web browser.
It's quite extraordinary.
And then finally,
and perhaps most importantly
as it relates to 10G,
is manageability.
If indeed we're going to have lots of
servers all over this grid cooperating,
some of them today are being
database servers and tomorrow
we're retooling them over to be
app servers and then one fails.
When we have all this complexity,
manageability becomes a priority.
And for us,
that means making sure that you
can not only manage the data,
but you can also manage the data.
So I think that's a
really important thing.
And the other thing that we've done is
we've done a lot of research and we've
done a lot of research and we've done a
lot of research on how we can actually
control what servers are doing what at
any given time and how it's secured,
but that you can do it
through a rich user interface,
do it in a way that certainly in
the Mac world you are accustomed
to interacting with your systems.
So we have focused a lot
in 10G on enhancing the
manageability across the board.
So what's important when we
think about these ilities,
we love to define our technology
around these sort of enterprise terms.
Well, there's another technology
that we think of,
and that's OS X.
And just as Bud said,
it has grown into an enterprise-capable
operating system married with the
XServe platform to give it this level
of enterprise stability and scalability.
And what's great about it is the grid
architecture that we're focused on
across all of our hardware partners
is super consistent with this idea
that Apple has with XServes to make
sure that all of these servers,
can cooperate,
share the same infrastructure,
share the same disk, and so on.
And so we've discovered that our
technologies are very synergistic.
And so as a result,
we have ported Oracle 10G to OS X.
What we've also done is moved
our flagship development
environment to OS X as well.
We call this JDeveloper.
It's an integrated development
environment for Java development,
PL/SQL development, debugging,
UML modeling.
It's a complete professional
development environment that
has also been moved to OS X.
The development environment is
[Transcript missing]
So what's important about
this is that the 10G database,
which we like to think is the most
robust way of managing and storing
your information inside an enterprise,
is now available on this
important platform from Apple,
which has the same goals that we had,
lowering the cost of
enterprise computing,
while at the same time,
we increase performance, scalability,
secureability, ease of use, and security.
So I'm here to tell you
that Oracle 10G on OS X will
be available this fall,
and today you can go
download it from this URL.
Play with it.
Because we run on a lot of platforms,
its production availability is
dependent on a larger release cycle,
which is scheduled now
to end this summer,
the next release cycle.
And this will be available
in early fall in production,
but the code is available
for you to download today.
Also here, you can download JDeveloper.
And JDeveloper,
the development environment,
is available for you in
developer preview release,
and it is scheduled to go production
in the beginning of September.
Okay?
So we're super excited about being here.
We very much enjoy our
relationship with Apple.
We like to think of ourselves
as innovators in the enterprise
around information management,
and we're really excited about OS X and
the XServe as a platform to showcase
what we mean when we say grid computing.
So to Apple, I say thank you,
and to all of you,
I appreciate your attention.
Thanks.
Tim.
Well, thanks, Tim.
And as he just mentioned,
Oracle 10G and JDeveloper, download them,
play with them.
Now, speaking of JDeveloper,
I want to talk a bit about
enterprise development tools.
And this has been a huge story for us.
JDeveloper is the latest,
but you're going to hear
a lot more in this space.
When I think of Mac OS X,
I think of development tools.
And I think of not just a
toolbox of development tools,
but I think of,
if you've ever been in the
hardware store and you've seen
those huge tool carriers that have
like three tiers and 50 drawers,
that's what I think of,
because not only are all
the open source tools there,
but great tools like JDeveloper, IDEs,
starting with, of course, XDeveloper.
And then there's Xcode,
which is bundled in the box.
And, you know,
Xcode continues to improve,
especially getting great
this last year in the area of
performance with zero link.
So you can get around the compile, link,
debug loop with zero linking time.
Fix and continue,
which actually makes it even faster.
And distributed building,
which changes the paradigm so you
can distribute your builds sort
of like worms over the network.
Great set of development tools.
And then there's the open
source development tools.
And then, as I mentioned,
from third-party developers.
So some announcements that
are happening this week.
Borland, optimize it suite for Java.
So a complete performance
solution for Java development.
Shortens their development
and testing cycles.
Improves your reliability.
Enhances developer productivity.
Eclipse,
which Eclipse.org just announced last
week the availability of Eclipse.
Their support for Eclipse on
Mac OS X is going to be great.
And then there's the open
source development tools.
And then, as I mentioned,
from third-party developers.
So some announcements that
are happening this week.
Borland, optimize it suite for Java.
So a complete performance solution
for Java development shortens their
development and testing cycles.
Improves your reliability.
Enhances developer productivity.
Eclipse,
which Eclipse.org just announced last
week the availability of Eclipse.
And then, as I mentioned,
from third-party developers.
So some announcements that
are happening this week.
Eclipse on Mac OS X, which is big news.
And I believe it's now available for
download this week from Eclipse.org.
So an open source IDE for Java.
And last but not least,
I want to introduce the father of Java,
James Gosling,
vice president for Sun Corporation,
who's going to come up and tell
us some of the great things that
are coming out of Sun for the
Mac OS X development community.
So, James.
James Gosling.
Hello.
I don't actually need this.
That's right.
I'm actually going to
drive my own computer here.
So as you may have noticed,
there's another conference going on here.
And it's sort of entertaining.
I mean, I'm a happy Mac user.
This machine is not loaned by Apple.
I actually had to pay money for this one.
And it has got many, many miles on it.
I drag it around and I love it dearly.
So I'm going to talk to you a little bit
about what's going on in the Java world.
Try to do sort of a quick summary.
And I'm going
A lot of what we do in the
Java universe is sort of about this,
this kind of picture of sort
of ubiquitous computing.
There's been this sort of evolution from
desktops to servers to lots of little
devices on the edges connected to things
in the middle to databases and various
things that transduce this or that.
Fairly wide-ranging sets of things.
So, for example, this is my, you know,
Sun ID card.
If you didn't notice,
there's a little metallic pad there.
This is a smart card.
This has got a CPU on it.
This is a Java smart card.
There are about six and a half,
650 million Java smart cards
out there in the world today.
They're used all over the place.
And you can actually run
real live Java code on here.
It does, the new generation ones do,
like, you know, all kinds of fancy
encryption and networking.
And, you know, it's just amazing what you
can do with these things.
You know,
the other really common network node
in our universe is one of these.
This is a Nokia cell phone.
This one has, this one is actually
a Java multiprocessor.
Because if, all GSM phones have what are
called SIM cards in them.
SIM cards are smart cards.
And all the GSM SIM cards are Java cards.
Plus which the main processor does Java.
This is actually a fairly modern one
that uses a standard called MidP2.0.
And so it's,
the software for these things
is kind of dominated by games.
As one would expect, I suppose.
It's like 95% games.
But there's,
but the market for games on cell
phones last year was about $4 billion.
You know, which is, you know,
not exactly chump change.
And, you know,
it's a part of the sort of incredible
diversity of the Java world.
One of the demos this morning was the
latest stuff in the automotive world.
The upcoming sort of BMWs have complete
other -- their complete navigation
and entertainment systems are all
sort of wall-to-wall Java code.
There's a -- if you go to the pavilion,
you'll see a couple of BMWs that have,
you know, pretty large-scale
Java multiprocessors inside them.
And they do a really, really,
really nice job.
And, of course, some of it's -- some of
it's not just the Java.
Some of it's goofy.
If any of you were at the
Java keynote this morning,
which you could have seen and still
made it back here for Steve's,
there was the Java-controlled
liquid nitrogen cannon --
We're running this contest.
We do t-shirts tossed into the audience.
I had sort of run out of ideas for ways
to toss t-shirts into the audience.
Last year,
I did a trebuchet going medieval,
and this year we ran it as a contest
to get people to come up with
interesting ways to hurl t-shirts
into the audience and maybe use
a little Java code on the way.
The three finalists are today, tomorrow,
and Thursday.
Today's was a truly impressive cannon.
If they actually let them
crank it up all the way,
it actually does take chunks of
concrete out of the back wall.
But we actually managed
to not injure anyone,
which in the practices last
night was a big concern.
So anyway, Java's role in this sort of
infrastructure that people have been
building that goes from these huge
enterprise servers to these desktops
to cell phones to all the smart cards
is it's kind of a conceptual framework.
I mean, Java is a language.
Languages are ways that people
think and express their thoughts,
and in particular,
how you express what you want
the damn piece of iron to do.
And the lovely thing about Java is
that it actually spans all of this
stuff so that developers can view this
reality of stuff out there that is
extremely heterogeneous as something
that is a lot more homogeneous.
You can really think about
programming for your Mac desktop as
being the same thing as programming
for your Windows desktop.
And it's sort of a different twist
on the sort of marketing side.
It's a whole different kind of marketing
line that various people have been using,
the whole "write once,
run anywhere," which I like,
which is sort of "learn once,
work anywhere." And that lets you
sort of build communities that span
a lot of different technologies.
You see a lot of IT shops that have
You know, they don't have like mainframe
developers and point-of-sale
terminal developers and,
you know,
VMS developers and
DOS PowerVS developers,
they've just got developers and
they happen to work wherever they're
needed because all the machines
kind of speak the same thing.
And it gives you this sort of
freedom and flexibility that is
just a wonderful thing to do.
And it really has made
Java be everywhere.
There are somewheres around 4
million professional developers
that do Java as their day job.
If you count people
who have learned Java,
like university students,
you get completely stupid numbers.
But it's impossible to
measure at this point.
And it really is not a marketing slogan.
I mean, the number of these machines out
there that speak Java is huge.
Currently, we're like 350 million
Java-enabled cell phones.
The vast majority of GSM cell
phones are Java cell phones.
And you see it in all
kinds of embedded stuff,
for instance.
The Canon this morning was controlled
by a little embedded server.
It's a little board about this big,
made by a Dallas semiconductor.
I think they call it the tiny stick.
And it's a general sort of
Industrial Automation Controller,
you download Java code to it and it
controls relays and servo motors and
whatever it is you wire it up to.
And there's a big community
of folks doing that out there.
One of the things that does make
Java work so well is that Java really
isn't a product from a company.
Java really is a community.
There are a lot of companies
that work together.
Apple works with us.
Oracle works with us.
IBM works with us.
Not Microsoft,
but just about everybody else.
[Transcript missing]
That's actually pretty horrible.
But outside of the U.S.,
you see a lot of Linux.
You go to China, Brazil, France,
you see a lot of Linux on the desktop.
And developers have really been
starting to care about that.
And of course, the reason that I'm here
today is that people actually
care about Macs as a desktop.
They're nowhere near where Windows is,
but they're enough to get
developers interested.
They're really getting, you know,
pretty fascinating.
And these days, we've got modern
JVMs pretty much everywhere.
As near as we can tell,
there are about 650 million desktops
out there in the world that are,
that have sort of modern JVMs on them.
And by that,
I mean sort of anything but Microsoft.
And so when people write Java apps,
they actually run pretty much anywhere.
And there are a number of really
nice ways to launch them these days.
There's Java Web Start and Applets.
Web Start is a fairly nice one
that is a sort of combination
of sort of web-friendly
navigation and easy deployment.
of what are really sort
of full-up desktop apps.
And most systems that
implement Web Start,
and Apple is one of them,
if you Web Start the same
app a couple of times,
they'll sort of ask you, well,
do you want me to turn this
into a real live application?
And then they do that.
And then it's a real loaded desktop app.
It's installed and it runs.
And your users have never
had to run an installer.
They just click the link on a web page
and it just sort of did the right thing.
And the performance has been pretty nice.
If you've watched my slides,
I'm not using Keynote.
I'm actually using a slide
program that I wrote.
And it's a slide program that
I kind of use as sort of an
experimental testbed for being goofy.
And a month or so ago,
I decided that I didn't
know the 3D APIs very well,
so I shoehorned 3D into my slideshow,
right?
So you can sort of do all kinds
of really stupid things when
you're doing a 3D project.
[Transcript missing]
Sun has a number of tools.
Our base tool is
something called NetBeans.
It's an open source project,
sort of like Eclipse,
except that it's been an open source
project for at least a year longer,
and it's been available on
the Mac for quite a while.
And actually, where
Oh, there we go.
So this is NetBeans 4.0.
I've got most of the
windows sort of closed away.
One of the things about NetBeans
as an open source project is
you can get all the latest bits.
So if you go to netbeans.org,
you'll find the current FCS release,
which is the 3.6 release.
You'll find the upcoming release,
which is the 4.0 release.
And actually, you'll find two releases
of the 4.0 release.
There's something called the Daily Build,
which only the truly
brave would download.
And then there's something
called the Q Build,
which is the daily build.
Which is every day the dailies
are run through some QA.
And if by some random chance
one kind of passes QA,
then that gets called the Q Build.
So this is a Q Build of NetBeans 4.
I'm not going to really show you
anything about it other than it's there.
It's a real Mac app.
It does all the Mac buttons and things.
Although, I won't bother showing that.
But the really interesting
tool for us these days has
been this thing called Creator.
Creator is a very sort of...
So it's really targeted at
visual basic developers,
at people who--
[Transcript missing]
A real Mac app.
Here it is.
It's actually on the toolbar.
And I'll actually launch it just
so you can actually believe me.
And this is actually, this is a Mac.
And the release of Creator that
you can get today runs on the Mac.
It also runs on Linux and
on Solaris and on Windows.
and the rest of the team will
be joined by Tim Hoechsst,
James Gosling,
and the rest of the team will
be joined by Tim Hoechsst,
James Gosling.
Data flow, the business process
logic of your application,
and each sort of node,
each sort of place where
you stop is a web page.
The web page construction
is all this sort of drag and
drop kind of construction.
[Transcript missing]
You can edit them, stretch them.
You can see properties off on the side.
You can put all kinds of, you know,
[Transcript missing]
You can use the property sheet.
You can change it.
If you look closely,
you can see that's actually a
Mac button that it's constructing.
It's a full-blown Mac app.
It does all the really nice stuff.
The way that you add components
here is it's got this notion of
services that you can tie in.
You can drag and drop both web services,
and here's some built-in web services.
Here's some data sources.
You can drag and drop fields out
of databases and construct tables.
I unfortunately can't show you that
because my database isn't connected.
No discard.
Go away.
So it's a lot of fun.
There are a lot of other fun
things going on in the Java world.
There's a project called Mackinac,
which is a real-time system,
a large-scale real-time system.
So if you happen to be in need of
running a large power plant and reading
tens of thousands of sensors a second
with about four microseconds jitter,
Mackinac's for you.
If you're next door and you
see anybody who's Brazilian,
ask them about what's
happening in Brazil with Java.
It's completely crazy.
Things like 96% of all of their tax
returns are filed electronically.
Their whole IRS equivalent
is a big bag of Java code.
And the front end is a Java app.
Their equivalent of the
IRS built the tax preparation.
And it runs on Macs,
it runs on Linux boxes, it runs on PCs,
it runs all over the place.
There's Joggle, the Java OpenGL thing,
which is what is driving this.
My little slideshow guy.
If you want to have some real geek fun,
go look at a website called slu.com.
It's got a Java applet and a
Java backend that lets you drive
a giant telescope on the top of
a mountain on the Canary Islands.
If you want to do an open source project
or look in the Java developer community,
there's this website, dev.java.net,
which is sort of like SourceForge,
but it's a big community
of Java developers.
And of course,
the fun thing for me this year
is the t-shirt hurling contest.
The picture here is the
trebuchet that I built last year.
And I invite you all to come and join us.
All of you are WWDC attendees.
You get Java 1 pavilion passes.
All you have to do is walk across
the street to the north lobby
registration area with your badge
and go to the registration counter.
And you complete the online form and
where it says enter a priority code,
just type in "Apple"
and you've got a badge.
You can go down and visit the pavilion.
My favorite place is always the
jewel cases full of cell phones.
And there's lots of people there
that will show you all kinds of
high-end enterprise software,
small embedded stuff, developer tools.
It's like all over the map.
And the vast majority of it runs on Mac.
Thank you.
Thanks, James.
Thank you, James.
So, as of today, Sun has announced that
Sun Java Studio Creator is
available on Mac OS X,
and we're extremely pleased about that.
And I'm extremely pleased
because having been,
you know, somewhat involved a number of
years ago in the original interface
builder in the next step days,
I'm a strong believer in visual
building of applications.
So, Creator is a great tool.
I recommend you, you know,
get a copy of it, try it out,
play with it.
We're very pleased.
Thanks.
So it's been a banner
year for developers.
We have over 450,000
registered developers for
Mac OS X on our developer site.
We have, as you've seen,
a great set of enterprise
tools for the Mac,
over 12,000 application
shipping on the Mac,
so a great year,
and we think we're going to have a
great year going forward as well.
And speaking of that,
so today I'm pleased
to be able to introduce
Tiger Server.
I want to take you through a few
of the features of Tiger Server,
some of the top features.
There's over 250 new features
in Mac OS Tiger Server,
over 100 open source projects included.
If you remember,
there were 80 in Panther.
We've upped that to over
100 open source projects.
uh first feature which is kind of near
and dear to me is 64-bit applications now
in panther of course you've had 64-bit
math all along what we're introducing
in tiger is 64-bit pointers so you can
have 64-bit address spaces for their
for your applications this is a big deal
for anyone who has to handle uh large
amounts of data at once and uh what this
what might this be i was looking the
other day noah's database for example
of the surface of the world with 100
meter resolution in terms of how many
feet above sea level or meters above
sea level that database when you unpack
it which i actually did on my mac last
week is about four gigabytes in size
so you add that and a few other things
to your database and you need a lot
of stuff in memory at once well 64-bit
apps in tiger is going to give you that
we support 64-bit processes we have
64-bit system library we're taking a
a stepped approach here what we did
first is convert system library so all
the non-gui libraries are going to be
converted or are converted in tiger
to support 64 bits gcc uh support 64
bits so for the non-gui portion of your
application you can run right alongside
32-bit apps run a 64-bit address space
and then if your app is constructed
client server so the gui runs in a client
and they communicate you can actually
have a full solution that that takes
advantage of very large memory sets on
xserv 64-bit tools we use lp64 so longs
and pointers are 64 bits integers are
32 bits this is important because that
is the standard for unix all the other
vendors have settled out on that being
the standard so for porting applications
between linux or unix and Mac OS X that
becomes quite easy you don't have to have
different versions of your source code so
this is a big deal we expect to see great
applications showing up over the next
year in this space nt migration tool for
anybody who is still running nt in their
server shops and if you're running pdc's
primary domain controllers we can now
take over that job with Mac OS X server
with tiger so we have a migration tool
that actually sucks out all your data
from your domain controller puts it into
your tiger server user and group accounts
and you can upgrade your nt server to
a Mac OS X server and and run it as a
primary domain controller put your users
accounts your users home directories
so support windows as a client from
Mac OS X server and have a very robust
high reliability modern technology
server great number of customers are in
this space they're still running domain
controllers they've not moved to open
directory which is a large shift if they
want to move their OS and their server
rooms to a better OS we have a great
solution there software update server
this has been a big request thank you
So what is this?
This is a proxy cache server
for Apple software updates.
This lets you, inside your firewall,
run a proxy cache server for
Apple software updates that lets
you control when your customer or
when your users see the updates.
So you have complete control over that.
It only displays those updates
to users when you approve them.
And it saves network bandwidth
because you're only downloading
once from Apple and everything
else is inside the firewall.
So, huge request.
We think this is going to be a big hit.
Weblog Server,
a blog server based on Blogsum.
Calendar-based navigation,
customizable themes,
syndication using RDF, RSS, RSS2,
and ATOM, so we support all the acronyms
for the ways that you do this.
And as I mentioned, based on Blogsum,
a great blog server built
right into Mac OS X Tiger.
And finally,
another highly requested feature.
iChat server for inside your firewall.
And this is great.
Run the iChat server
inside your firewall.
Your communication doesn't
have to leave your enterprise.
It's your namespace.
You manage the namespace.
All traffic can be
encrypted with SSL or TSL,
so it's highly secure.
It supports iChat and Jabber clients.
So you can interoperate between
Windows and Mac or Linux.
So this is going to be, I think,
a huge hit in the enterprise.
This is a highly requested feature.
Other features that
are included in Tiger,
XGrid 1.0 is supported.
So for turnkey grid computing,
for applications that are amenable to it,
you can spread it around your
network on servers or clients.
I think that's going to find a wide
amount of use in the enterprise,
as I mentioned.
It's already being widely used in the
scientific and academic community.
Small office, home office setup,
so easy out-of-the-box setup for
a small office or home office.
Ackles support.
Access Control List,
and mobile home directories
so that you can,
from a PowerBook,
sync your home directory
with the directory on a disk.
Take your PowerBook, come back.
And as I mentioned,
over 250 other features,
over 100 open source projects.
So again, we're continuing to leverage
open source into the product,
focusing our innovation
on making it easy to use,
easy to manage, easy to deploy,
and easy to develop for.
Going to be available in
the first half of 2005.
and you all get a copy of
Mac OS X Server Preview Release,
Developer Preview Release for
coming to the conference.
So thank you very much.
I just want to mention before you go,
we have a lot of great things
that you should be attending.
Other sessions you should be attending.
Some of them are listed up here.
Apple and Scientific Computing,
Mac OS X Server Update.
I especially want to
mention on Wednesday,
there's an Oracle session with Tom Kite.
Those of you who know Ask Tom and
are familiar with Oracle,
you've got to go see Tom give a
talk about Oracle on Mac OS X.
X-Serve Raid, Apple Design Awards,
et cetera.
So thank you very much.
Thank you.